Add launch handler article (#6908)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/launch-handler/index.md

    "route_to": "new-client",
    "navigate_existing_client": "always"
  }
}
```

If unspecified, `launch_handler` defaults to
`{"route_to": "auto", "navigate_existing_client": "always"}`. The allowed values for the sub-fields
are as follows:

- `route_to`:

  - `new-client`: A new browsing context is created in a web app window to load the launch's target
    URL.
  - `existing-client`: An existing browsing context is used, specifically the one most recently used. How the launch is handled within that
    browsing context depends on `navigate_existing_client`.
  - `auto`: The behavior is up to the user agent to decide what works best for the platform. For
    example, mobile devices only support single clients and would use `existing-client`, while
    desktop devices support multiple windows and would use `new-client` to avoid data loss.

- `navigate_existing_client`:
  - `always`: Existing browsing contexts chosen for launch will navigate the browsing context to the
    launch's target URL.
  - `never`: Existing browsing contexts chosen for launch will not be navigated and instead have
    `targetURL` in the enqueued `LaunchParams` set to the launch's target URL.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

{% Aside 'warning' %}
  Careful, setting `navigate_existing_client` to `always` can cause data loss. Only use this
  when it is safe to do so (for example, in a music player), or make sure the user's data gets
  saved before navigating away from the previous location.
{% endAside%}

```

  `LaunchParams` object in the launched page's `window.launchQueue`, similar to the File
  Handling API.
authors:
  - thomassteiner
date: 2021-12-14
# updated: 2021-12-14
description: |
  Launch handler lets you control how your app is launched, for example, whether it uses an existing
  window and whether the chosen window is navigated to the launch URL.
hero: image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/xw3fQotYBLeA8AUZAh5O.jpg
alt: Cape Caneveral rocket launch.
origin_trial:
  url: https://developer.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/2978005253598740481
tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - progressive-web-apps
  - capabilities
---

{% Aside %} The Launch Handler API is part of the [capabilities project](/fugu-status/) and is
currently in development. This post will be updated as the implementation progresses. {% endAside %}

## What is the Launch Handler API? {: #what }

There are many ways to launch a Progressive Web App. Probably the most common is via the icon on the
home screen or the app drawer of the device. But when you think about it, there are many other ways
a launch can happen:

> - The app can be launched as the result of a share action when the app is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A share action when the app is a
```

Reviewer: This is one of the permissible uses of a sentence fragment.

  [share target](/web-share-target/).

> - A user may have clicked a file in their file explorer and decided to open it with the PWA, which
>   acts as a [file handler](/file-handling/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A user click in the file explorer opening the PWA, which
  acts as a [file handler](/file-handling/).
```

Reviewer: Lists should maintain a parallel grammatical structure.

> - If the PWA has registered as a [protocol handler](/protocol-handling/), the PWA may launch as the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A registered [protocol handler](/protocol-handling/), that the PWA may launches as the
```

  result of a matching protocol.

> - The PWA may also be launched as a result of a click on a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A click on a
```

  [push notification](/push-notifications-overview/) or an [app icon shortcut](/app-shortcuts/).

> There are even more ways, but you get the idea… Given the manyfold possibilities for launching PWAs,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are even more ways, but you get the idea. Given the manifold possibilities for launching PWAs,
```

> what was missing so far is a way to let apps customize their launch behavior across all types of app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
what has been missing is a way to let apps customize their launch behavior across all types of app
```

Reviewer: This verb tense is called 'past perfect' if you decided to look it up.

</div>

## How to use the Launch Handler API {: #use }

### Enabling via about://flags

To experiment with the Launch Handler API locally, without an origin trial token, enable the
`#enable-desktop-pwas-launch-handler` flag in `about://flags`.

### Enabling support during the origin trial phase

Starting in Chromium&nbsp;98, the Launch Handler API will be available as an origin trial in
Chromium. The origin trial is expected to end in Chromium&nbsp;102 (June&nbsp;15, 2022).

{% include 'content/origin-trials.njk' %}

### Register for the origin trial {: #register-for-ot }

{% include 'content/origin-trial-register.njk' %}

### Feature detection

To check if the Launch Handler API is supported, use:

```javascript
if ('launchQueue' in window && 'targetURL' in LaunchParams.prototype) {
  // The Launch Handler API is supported.
}
```

### The `launch_handler` manifest member

To declaratively specify the launch behavior of your app, add the `launch_handler` manifest member
to your manifest. It has two sub-fields, `route_to` and `navigate_existing_client`. The former lets
you control whether a new or an existing client should be launched, and the latter how and if this

> client should be navigated. The code snippet below shows an excerpt of a Web App Manifest file with
> exemplary values that would always route all launches to a new client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
client should be navigated. The Web App Manifest excerpt below shows a file with
exemplary values that would always route all launches to a new client.
```

```json
{
  "launch_handler": {
    "route_to": "new-client",
    "navigate_existing_client": "always"
  }
}
```

If unspecified, `launch_handler` defaults to
`{"route_to": "auto", "navigate_existing_client": "always"}`. The allowed values for the sub-fields
are as follows:

- `route_to`:

  - `new-client`: A new browsing context is created in a web app window to load the launch's target
    URL.

>   - `existing-client`: The most recently interacted with browsing context in a web app window for
>     the app being launched is chosen to handle the launch. How the launch is handled within that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `existing-client`: An existing browsing context is used, specifically the one most recently used. How the launch is handled within that
```

Reviewer: The exiting sentence was a bit of a mouthful. If I didn't get this right, we'll need a third option.

    browsing context depends on `navigate_existing_client`.
  - `auto`: The behavior is up to the user agent to decide what works best for the platform. For
    example, mobile devices only support single clients and would use `existing-client`, while

>     desktop devices support multiple windows and would use `new-client` to avoid data loss.

Reviewer: So I should use `auto` unless I'm doing something specifically for desktop or mobile? Should we say that?

So `existing_client` can cause data loss. Shouldn't you say that in the description of that option?

Author: The `auto` value is the default, you get this when you don't specify anything else. I add a warning about data loss.

- `navigate_existing_client`:
  - `always`: Existing browsing contexts chosen for launch will navigate the browsing context to the
    launch's target URL.
  - `never`: Existing browsing contexts chosen for launch will not be navigated and instead have
    `targetURL` in the enqueued `LaunchParams` set to the launch's target URL.

Both `route_to` and `navigate_existing_client` also accept a list (array) of values, where the first
valid value will be used. This is to allow new values to be added to the spec without breaking
backwards compatibility with existing implementations.

> For example, if the value `"matching-url-client"` were added, sites would specify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if the hypothetical value `"matching-url-client"` were added, sites would specify
```

Reviewer: I don't like adding adjectives, but I wanted to make it clearer that this is not a promise to add this value.

`"route_to": ["matching-url-client", "existing-client"]` to continue to control the behavior of
older browsers that did not support `"matching-url-client"`.

### The `window.launchQueue` interface

If the app has declared that it wants to handle launches in an existing client (by specifying
`"route_to": "existing-client"`), it can imperatively do something with incoming launch URLs.
This is where the `launchQueue` comes into play. To access launch target URLs, a site needs to
specify a consumer for the `window.launchQueue` object, which is then passed the target URL via the
`launchParams.targetURL` field. Launches are queued until they are handled by the specified
consumer, which is invoked exactly once for each launch. In this manner, every launch is handled,
regardless of when the consumer was specified. The code snippet below shows a fictive audio player

> PWA that extract a song ID from a target URL that it is potentially passed upon launch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PWA that extracts a song ID from a target URL that it is passed on launch.
```

```js
launchQueue.setConsumer((launchParams) => {
  const songID = extractSongId(launchParams.targetURL);
  if (songID) {
    playSong(songID);
  }
});
```

## Demo

You can see a demo of the Launch Handler API in action in the [PWA Launch Handler Demo][demo]. Be
sure to check out the [source code][demo-source] of the application to see how it uses the Launch
Handler API.

<!--lint disable no-literal-urls -->

> 1. Install the app on a Chrome OS device.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Install the _Musicr 2.0_ app on a Chrome OS device.
```

1. Send yourself a link in a chat application of the form
   <code>https://launch-handler.glitch.me?track=<strong>https://example.com/music.mp3</strong></code>.
   (You can customize
   <code><strong>https://example.com/music.mp3</strong></code> for any URL pointing to an audio file, for example,
   <a href="https://launch-handler.glitch.me?track=https://cdn.glitch.me/3e952c9c-4d6d-4de4-9873-23cf976b422e%2Ffile_example_MP3_700KB.mp3?v=1638795977190"><code>https://launch-handler.glitch.me?track=https://cdn.glitch.me/3e952c9c-4d6d-4de4-9873-23cf976b422e%2Ffile_example_MP3_700KB.mp3?v=1638795977190</code></a>).
1. Click the link in your chat app and notice how _Musicr 2.0_ opens and plays the track.

> 1. Click the link in your chat app again and notice how always just one instance of Musicr 2.0 exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click the link in your chat app again and notice that you will not get a second instance of Musicr 2.0.
```

<!--lint enable no-literal-urls -->

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/nFgE69N5VTYBDon1DGmB.png", alt="Musicr 2.0 web application launched and playing music it handled from the launch params.", width="800", height="235" %}

## Security and permissions

> The Chromium team has designed and implemented the Launch Handler API using the core principles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Chromium team designed and implemented the Launch Handler API using the core principles
```

Reviewer: I should have caught this a long time ago. I've [opened a PR](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/7033) to fix this elsewhere.
